<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>I cannot avoid subjoining in a note a succeeding paragraph of Scott’s letter, which, though it does not relate to the main subject of our correspondence, was too characteristic to be omitted. Some time previously I had sent Miss Sophia Scott small duodecimo <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">American</span> editions of her father’s poems published in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Edinburgh</span> in quarto volumes; showing the “nigromancy” of the <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">American</span> press, by which a quart of wine is conjured into a pint bottle. Scott observes: “In my hurry, I have not thanked you in Sophia’s name for the kind attention which furnished her with the <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">American</span> volumes. I am not quite sure I can add my own, since you have made her acquainted with much more of papa’s folly than she would ever otherwise have learned; for I had taken special care they should never see any of those things during their earlier years. I think I have told you that Walter is sweeping the firmament with a feather like a maypole and indenting the pavement with a sword like a scythe⁠—in other words, he has become a whiskered hussar in the 18th Dragoons.” <a href="../text/preface.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Address on the opening of the Liverpool Institution. <a href="../text/roscoe.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From a poem on the death of the Princess Charlotte, by the Reverend Rann Kennedy, <abbr class="degree">AM</abbr>. <a href="../text/rural-life-in-england.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Buchanan</cite>. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Ballenden’s translation of Hector Boyce</cite>. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Roger L’Estrange</cite>. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lyf, Person. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Twistis, small boughs or twigs. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Note.⁠—The language of the quotations is generally modernized. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Setten, incline. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gilt, what injury have I done, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Wrought gold. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Largesse, bounty. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Estate, dignity. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cunning, discretion. <a href="../text/a-royal-poet.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Part of a sketch omitted in the preceding editions. <a href="../text/a-sunday-in-london.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The following was the ancient inscription on the monument of this worthy, which, unhappily, was destroyed in the great conflagration.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>Hereunder lyth a man of Fame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>William Walworth callyd by name;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Fishmonger he was in lyfftime here,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And twise Lord Maior, as in books appere;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who, with courage stout and manly myght,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Slew Jack Straw in Kyng Richard’s sight.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For which act done, and trew entent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Kyng made him knyght incontinent;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And gave him armes, as here you see,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To declare his fact and chivaldrie.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He left this lyff the yere of our God</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Thirteen hundred fourscore and three odd.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>An error in the foregoing inscription has been corrected by the venerable Stowe. “Whereas,” saith he, “it hath been far spread abroad by vulgar opinion, that the rebel smitten down so manfully by Sir William Walworth, the then worthy Lord Maior, was named Jack Straw, and not Wat Tyler, I thought good to reconcile this rash-conceived doubt by such testimony as I find in ancient and good records. The principal leaders, or captains, of the commons, were Wat Tyler, as the first man; the second was John, or Jack, Straw,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <cite>Stowe’s London</cite>. <a href="../text/the-boars-head-tavern-eastcheap.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As this inscription is rife with excellent morality, I transcribe it for the admonition of delinquent tapsters. It is no doubt, the production of some choice spirit who once frequented the Boar’s Head.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>Bacchus, to give the toping world surprise,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Produced one sober son, and here he lies.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though rear’d among full hogsheads, he defy’d</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The charms of wine, and everyone beside.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>O reader, if to justice thou’rt inclined,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Keep honest Preston daily in thy mind.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He drew good wine, took care to fill his pots,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had sundry virtues that excused his faults.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>You that on Bacchus have the like dependence,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pray copy Bob in measure and attendance. <a href="../text/the-boars-head-tavern-eastcheap.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Thou didst swear to me upon a parcel-gilt goblet, sitting in my Dolphin chamber, at the round table, by a sea-coal fire, on Wednesday, in <span epub:type="z3998:event">Whitsunweek</span>, when the prince broke thy head for likening his father to a singing man at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Windsor</span>; thou didst swear to me then, as I was washing thy wound, to marry me, and make me my lady, thy wife. Canst thou deny it?”⁠—<cite>Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, Part 2</cite>.<a href="../text/the-boars-head-tavern-eastcheap.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In Latin and French hath many soueraine wittes had great delyte to endite, and have many noble thinges fulfilde, but certes there ben some that speaken their poisye in French, of which speche the Frenchmen have as good a fantasye as we have in hearying of Frenchmen’s Englishe.⁠—<cite>Thomas Usk’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Testament of Love</i></cite>. <a href="../text/the-mutability-of-literature.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Holinshed, in his Chronicle, observes, “Afterwards, also, by diligent vell of Geffry Chaucer and John Gowre, in the time of Richard the Second, and after them of John Scogan and John Lydgate, monke of Berrie, our said toong was brought to an excellent passe, notwithstanding that it never came unto the type of perfection until the time of Queen Elizabeth, wherein John Jewell, Bishop of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Sarum</span>, John Fox, and sundrie learned and excellent writers, have fully accomplished the ornature of the same to their great praise and mortal commendation.”<a href="../text/the-mutability-of-literature.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Live ever sweete booke; the simple image of his gentle witt, and the golden pillar of his noble courage; and ever notify unto the world that thy writer was the secretary of eloquence, the breath of the muses, the honey bee of the daintyest flowers of witt and arte, the pith of morale and intellectual virtues, the arme of Bellona in the field, the tongue of Suada in the chamber, the spirits of Practise in esse, and the paragon of excellence in print.⁠—<cite>Harvey Pierce’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Supererogation</i></cite>. <a href="../text/the-mutability-of-literature.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>Thorow earth and waters deepe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The pen by skill doth passe:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And featly nyps the worldes abuse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And shoes us in a glasse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The vertu and the vice</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of every wight alyve;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The honey comb that bee doth make</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Is not so sweet in hyve,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As are the golden leves</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">That drops from poet’s head!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which doth surmount our common talke</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">As farre as dross doth lead.</span>
						</p>
						<p><cite>Churchyard</cite>. <a href="../text/the-mutability-of-literature.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The erudite reader, well versed in good-for-nothing lore, will perceive that the above Tale must have been suggested to the old <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">Swiss</span> by a little French anecdote, a circumstance said to have taken place in <span epub:type="z3998:place">Paris</span>. <a href="../text/the-spectre-bridegroom.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>i.e.</abbr>, <b>Cat’s Elbow</b>⁠—the name of a family of those parts, and very powerful in former times. The appellation, we are told, was given in compliment to a peerless dame of the family, celebrated for a fine arm. <a href="../text/the-spectre-bridegroom.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Sir <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Browne</cite>. <a href="../text/westminster-abbey.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Poor Robin’s Almanak, 1684</cite>. <a href="../text/the-stage-coach.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Peacham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Complete Gentleman</i>, 1622</cite>. <a href="../text/christmas-eve.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The mistletoe is still hung up in farmhouses and kitchens at <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span>, and the young men have the privilege of kissing the girls under it, plucking each time a berry from the bush. When the berries are all plucked the privilege ceases. <a href="../text/christmas-eve.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <span epub:type="z3998:event">Yule</span> clog is a great log of wood, sometimes the root of a tree, brought into the house with great ceremony on <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas Eve</span>, laid in the fireplace, and lighted with the brand of last year’s clog. While it lasted there was great drinking, singing, and telling of tales. Sometimes it was accompanied by <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> candles; but in the cottages the only light was from the ruddy blaze of the great wood fire. The <span epub:type="z3998:event">Yule</span> clog was to burn all night; if it went out, it was considered a sign of ill luck. <a href="../text/christmas-eve.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Flying Eagle</i>, a small gazette, published December 24, 1652: “The House spent much time this day about the business of the Navy, for settling the affairs at sea, and before they rose, were presented with a terrible remonstrance against <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> day, grounded upon divine Scriptures, 2 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> 16; 1 <abbr>Cor.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. 14, 17; and in honor of the Lord’s Day, grounded upon these Scriptures, John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span> 1; <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> 10; Psalms <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CXVIII</span> 24; <abbr>Lev.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span> 7, 11; Mark <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> 8; Psalms <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIV</span> 10, in which <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> is called Anti-christ’s masse, and those Massemongers and Papists who observe it, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> In consequence of which parliament spent some time in consultation about the abolition of <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> day, passed orders to that effect, and resolved to sit on the following day, which was commonly called <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> day.” <a href="../text/christmas-day.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Ule! Ule!</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Three puddings in a pule;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Crack nuts and cry ule!” <a href="../text/christmas-day.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“An <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">English</span> gentleman, at the opening of the great day⁠—<abbr>i.e.</abbr> on <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> day in the morning⁠—had all his tenants and neighbors enter his hall by daybreak. The strong beer was broached, and the blackjacks went plentifully about, with toast, sugar and nutmeg, and good Cheshire cheese. The Hackin (the great sausage) must be boiled by daybreak, or else two young men must take the maiden (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> the cook) by the arms and run her round the marketplace till she is shamed of her laziness.”⁠—Round about our Sea-Coal Fire. <a href="../text/christmas-day.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite>Sir John Suckling</cite>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old ceremony of serving up the boar’s head on <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> day is still observed in the hall of Queen’s College, Oxford. I was favored by the parson with a copy of the carol as now sung, and as it may be acceptable to such of my readers as are curious in these grave and learned matters, I give it entire.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>The boar’s head in hand bear I,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bedeck’d with bays and rosemary;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I pray you, my masters, be merry</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Quot estis in convivio.</span>
							<br/>
							<spam class="i2">Caput apri defero,</spam>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Reddens laudes domino.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>The boar’s head, as I understand,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Is the rarest dish in all this land,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which thus bedeck’d with a gay garland</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Let us servire cantico.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Caput apri defero, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>Our steward hath provided this</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In honor of the King of Bliss,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Which on this day to be served is</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">In Reginensi Atrio.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i2">Caput apri defero,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i7"><abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The peacock was anciently in great demand for stately entertainments. Sometimes it was made into a pie, at one end of which the head appeared above the crust in all its plumage, with the beak richly gilt; at the other end the tail was displayed. Such pies were served up at the solemn banquets of chivalry, when knights-errant pledged themselves to undertake any perilous enterprise, whence came the ancient oath, used by Justice Shallow, “by cock and pie.”</p>
					<p>The peacock was also an important dish for the <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> feast; and Massinger, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">City Madam</i>, gives some idea of the extravagance with which this, as well as other dishes, was prepared for the gorgeous revels of the olden times:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>Men may talk of Country Christmasses,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their thirty pound butter’d eggs, their pies of carps’ tongues;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their pheasants drench’d with ambergris: <em>the carcases of three fat wethers bruised for gravy to make sauce for a single peacock.</em> <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Wassail Bowl was sometimes composed of ale instead of wine, with nutmeg, sugar, toast, ginger, and roasted crabs; in this way the nut-brown beverage is still prepared in some old families and round the hearths of substantial farmers at <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span>. It is also called Lamb’s Wool, and is celebrated by Herrick in his “<span epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Twelfth Night</span>”:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span class="i1">Next crowne the bowle full</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">With gentle Lamb’s Wool;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Add sugar, nutmeg, and ginger</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">With store of ale too;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And thus ye must doe</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To make the Wassaile a swinger. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The custom of drinking out of the same cup gave place to each having his cup. When the steward came to the doore with the Wassel, he was to cry three times, Wassel, Wassel, Wassel, and then the chappell (chaplain) was to answer with a song.”⁠—<cite>Archaeologia</cite>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From <cite>Poor Robin’s Almanack</cite>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmasse</span> there was in the Kinges house, wheresoever hee was lodged, a lorde of misrule or mayster of merie disportes, and the like had ye in the house of every nobleman of honor, or good worshipper were he spirituall or temporall.⁠—<cite>Stowe</cite>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Maskings or mummeries were favorite sports at <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> in old times, and the wardrobes at halls and manor-houses were often laid under contribution to furnish dresses and fantastic disguisings. I strongly suspect Master Simon to have taken the idea of his from Ben Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Masque of Christmas</i>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Hawkins, speaking of the dance called the Pavon, from pavo, a peacock, says, “It is a grave and majestic dance; the method of dancing it anciently was by gentlemen dressed with caps and swords, by those of the long robe in their gowns, by the peers in their mantles, and by the ladies in gowns with long trains, the motion whereof, in dancing, resembled that of a peacock.”⁠—<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Music</i></cite>. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the time of the first publication of this paper the picture of an old-fashioned <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> in the country was pronounced by some as out of date. The author had afterwards an opportunity of witnessing almost all the customs above described, existing in unexpected vigor in the skirts of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Derbyshire</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:place">Yorkshire</span>, where he passed the <span epub:type="z3998:event">Christmas</span> holidays. The reader will find some notice of them in the author’s account of his sojourn at Newstead Abbey. <a href="../text/the-christmas-dinner.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is evident that the author of this interesting communication has included, in his general title of Little Britain, man of those little lanes and courts that belong immediately to Cloth Fair. <a href="../text/little-britain.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As mine host of the Half-Moon’s Confession of Faith may not be familiar to the majority of readers, and as it is a specimen of the current songs of Little Britain, I subjoin it in its original orthography. I would observe that the whole club always join in the chorus with a fearful thumping on the table and clattering of pewter pots.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>I cannot eate but lytle meate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">My stomacke is not good,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But sure I thinke that I can drinke</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">With him that weares a hood.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though I go bare, take ye no care,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">I nothing am a colde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I stuff my skyn so full within,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of joly good ale and olde.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Backe and syde go bare, go bare,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Both foote and hand go colde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, belly, God send thee good ale ynoughe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Whether it be new or olde.</span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>I have no rost, but a nut brawne toste,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And a crab laid in the fyre;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A little breade shall do me steade,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Much breade I not desyre.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>No frost nor snow, nor winde, I trowe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Can hurte mee, if I wolde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I am so wrapt and throwly lapt</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">>Of joly good ale and olde.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Backe and syde go bare, go bare, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>And Tyb my wife, that, as her lyfe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Loveth well good ale to seeke,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Full oft drynkes shee, tyll ye may see,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">The teares run downe her cheeke.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then doth shee trowle to me the bowle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Even as a mault-worme sholde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And sayth, sweete harte, I took my parte</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Of this jolly good ale and olde.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Backe and syde go bare, go bare, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></span>
						</p>
						<p>
							<span>Now let them drynke, tyll they nod and winke,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Even as goode fellowes sholde doe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>They shall not mysse to have the blisse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Good ale doth bring men to;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all poore soules that have scowred bowles,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Or have them lustily trolde,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>God save the lyves of them and their wives,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Whether they be yonge or olde.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Backe and syde go bare, go bare, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/little-britain.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The following is the only stanza extant of this lampoon:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>A parliament member, a justice of peace,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At home a poor scarecrow, at <span epub:type="z3998:place">London</span> an asse,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If lowsie is Lucy, as some volke miscalle it,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then Lucy is lowsie, whatever befall it.</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">He thinks himself great;</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Yet an asse in his state,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>We allow by his ears but with asses to mate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If Lucy is lowsie, as some volke miscalle it,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then sing lowsie Lucy whatever befall it. <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The luce is a pike or jack, and abounds in the Avon about Charlecot. <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A proof of Shakespeare’s random habits and associates in his youthful days may be found in a traditionary anecdote, picked up at <span epub:type="z3998:place">Stratford</span> by the elder Ireland, and mentioned in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Picturesque Views on the Avon</i>.</p>
					<p>About seven miles from <span epub:type="z3998:place">Stratford</span> lies the thirsty little market-town of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Bedford</span>, famous for its ale. Two societies of the village yeomanry used to meet, under the appellation of the <span epub:type="z3998:place">Bedford</span> topers, and to challenge the lovers of good ale of the neighboring villages to a contest of drinking. Among others, the people of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Stratford</span> were called out to prove the strength of their heads; and in the number of the champions was Shakespeare, who, in spite of the proverb that “they who drink beer will think beer,” was as true to his ale as Falstaff to his sack. The chivalry of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Stratford</span> was staggered at the first onset, and sounded a retreat while they had yet the legs to carry them off the field. They had scarcely marched a mile when, their legs failing them, they were forced to lie down under a crab tree, where they passed the night. It was still standing, and goes by the name of Shakespeare’s tree.</p>
					<p>In the morning his companions awaked the bard, and proposed returning to <span epub:type="z3998:place">Bedford</span>, but he declined, saying he had enough, having drank with</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>
							<span>Piping Pebworth, Dancing Marston,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Haunted Hilbro’, Hungry Grafton,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Dudging Exhall, Papist Wicksford,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Beggarly Broom, and Drunken Bedford.</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>“The villages here alluded to,” says Ireland, “still bear the epithets thus given them: the people of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Pebworth</span> are still famed for their skill on the pipe and tabor; <span epub:type="z3998:place">Hilborough</span> is now called <span epub:type="z3998:place">Haunted Hilborough</span>; and <span epub:type="z3998:place">Grafton</span> is famous for the poverty of its soil.” <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Scot, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Discoverie of Witchcraft</i>, enumerates a of these fireside fancies: “And they have so fraid us with host bull-beggars, spirits, witches, urchins, elves, hags, fairies, satyrs, pans, faunes, syrens, kit with the can sticke, tritons, centaurs, dwarfes, giantes, imps, calcars, conjurors, nymphes, changelings, incubus, Robin-goodfellow, the spoorne, the mare, the man in the oke, the hell-waine, the fier drake, the puckle, Tom Thombe, hobgoblins, Tom Tumbler, boneless, and such other bugs, that we were afraid of our own shadowes.” <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This effigy is in white marble, and represents the knight in complete armor. Near him lies the effigy of his wife, and on her tomb is the following inscription; which, if really composed by her husband, places him quite above the intellectual level of Master Shallow:</p>
					<p>Here lyeth the Lady Joyce Lucy wife of Sir Thomas Lucy of Charlecot in ye county of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Warwick</span>, Knight, Daughter and heir of Thomas Acton of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Sutton</span> in ye county of <span epub:type="z3998:place">Worcester</span> Esquire who departed out of this wretched world to her heavenly kingdom ye 10 day of February in ye yeare of our Lord God 1595 and of her age 60 and three. All the time of her lyfe a true and faythful servant of her good God, never detected of any cryme or vice. In religion most sounde, in love to her husband most faythful and true. In friendship most constant; to what in trust was committed unto her most secret. In wisdom excelling. In governing of her house, bringing up of youth in ye fear of God that did converse with her moste rare and singular. A great maintayner of hospitality. Greatly esteemed of her betters; misliked of none unless of the envyous. When all is spoken that can be saide a woman so garnished with virtue as not to be bettered and hardly to be equalled by any. As shee lived most virtuotisly so shee died most Godly. Set downe by him yt best did knowe what hath byn written to be true. <span class="signature">Thomas Lucye</span>. <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bishop Earle, speaking of the country gentleman of his time, observes, “His housekeeping is seen much in the different families of dogs and serving-men attendant on their kennels; and the deepness of their throats is the depth of his discourse. A hawk he esteems the true burden of nobility, and is exceedingly ambitious to seem delighted with the sport, and have his fist gloved with his jesses.” And Gilpin, in his description of a <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hastings, remarks, “He kept all sorts of hounds that run buck, fox, hare, otter, and badger; and had hawks of all kinds both long and short winged. His great hall was commonly strewed with marrowbones, and full of hawk perches, hounds, spaniels, and terriers. On a broad hearth, paved with brick, lay some of the choicest terriers, hounds, and spaniels.” <a href="../text/stratford-on-avon.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">American</span> Government has been indefatigable in its exertions to ameliorate the situation of the <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">Indians</span>, and to introduce among them the arts of civilization and civil and religious knowledge. To protect them from the frauds of the white traders no purchase of land from them by individuals is permitted, nor is any person allowed to receive lands from them as a present without the express sanction of government. These precautions are strictly enforced. <a href="../text/traits-of-indian-character.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>While correcting the proof-sheets of this article the author is informed that a celebrated <span epub:type="z3998:nationality">English</span> poet has nearly finished an heroic poem on the story of Philip of Pokanoket. <a href="../text/philip-of-pokanoket.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Now <span epub:type="z3998:place">Bristol, Rhode Island</span>. <a href="../text/philip-of-pokanoket.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <cite><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Increase Mather’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i></cite>. <a href="../text/philip-of-pokanoket.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><cite><abbr class="initialism">MS</abbr> of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Ruggles</cite>. <a href="../text/philip-of-pokanoket.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
